> AI-2 █
AI-2 GUIDE
==========

Give your computer an AI brain.

This is the guide for the computer you have just installed AI-2 on. The
other guide, START-HERE.txt, was about the USB stick and the installation;
that part is done.

En español: AI-2-GUIA.txt      (or  ai-2 guide --lang es )
Auf Deutsch: AI-2-ANLEITUNG.txt  (or  ai-2 guide --lang de )

You can open this file again at any time from Applications > AI-2 > AI-2
Guide, or in a terminal with:

  ai-2 guide

Everything below has two ways of doing it, one with the mouse and one in a
terminal. They do the same thing. Use whichever you prefer.


KNOWLEDGE PACKS

A Knowledge Pack is a set of documents this computer can search and answer
from in seconds, with no internet, and it tells you which document every
answer came from. Nothing in those answers is written by the AI, so nothing
is made up. On an older computer this is the fastest and most reliable thing
AI-2 does.

  Applications > AI-2 > Search Knowledge       type a question, read the answer
  ai-2 doc search "how do I find a big file?"  the same, in a terminal

After the results, type the number of one of them to read the whole document
it came from. Press q to come back to your questions.

Three Knowledge Packs come with AI-2:

  AI-2 Help           how to use this system, even when the network is down
  Linux Essentials    twenty everyday tasks: a full disk, a frozen program...
  Everyday Reference  196 countries: capitals, currencies, languages, codes

  ai-2 knowledge list        the packs on this computer
  ai-2 knowledge available   the packs you can add. If this computer has
                             none, this is how to get them, and Search
                             Knowledge offers them too.

You can make a Knowledge Pack from your own PDFs and notes on a fast
computer, and use it on a slow one:

  ai-2 doc index --in recipes ~/Documents/recipes/*.pdf
  ai-2 knowledge export recipes -o recipes.ai2pack
  ai-2 knowledge install recipes.ai2pack       (on the other computer)

One computer can also answer for every other one in the house:  ai-2 gopher


WHAT THIS COMPUTER CAN DO NOW

A language model runs on this machine itself, on the CPU. There is no
account, no subscription, and nothing you type goes to anyone. When you are
offline the AI still answers.

How good it is depends on the hardware, and AI-2 already measured it. The AI
Score (0 to 100) and the model that fits this machine were decided at the
first login. To see them again:

  ai-2 profile

An old computer gives short, slow answers from a small model. That is normal
and it is not broken. A small model can also get facts and simple arithmetic
wrong, so treat it like a fast helper, not an encyclopedia.

When you want facts you can rely on, use the Knowledge Packs above instead.
Those answers are taken word for word from documents, not written by the
model, so they are as good on this computer as on any other.

What it can be used for, judged for this very machine:

  ai-2 workflow                  chat, translation, documents, each marked
                                 ready, needs setup, or too slow here
  ai-2 workflow info documents   what one needs and how to use it
  ai-2 workflow install documents  downloads its models and prints the
                                 packages to install
  ai-2 doc index file.pdf        read a PDF, text file or scan into the
                                 documents index (slow on an old CPU)
  ai-2 doc ask "question"        the closest parts go to the AI with it
  ai-2 transcribe recording.mp3  speech to text with whisper.cpp; slow on an
                                 old computer, leave it running


TALK TO THE AI

Everything AI-2 adds to the menu sits in one place, Applications > AI-2.

  Applications > AI-2 > AI-2 Chat             the chat page in the browser
  Applications > AI-2 > AI-2 Chat (Terminal)  the same AI in a terminal

On a slow machine or with little memory, prefer the terminal one. It appears
instantly and leaves all the memory to the AI. It is also the one that works
over SSH and with a screen reader.

In a terminal:

  ai-2 chat              start the AI and open the chat page
  ai-2 chat --terminal   chat right there, lightest option
  ai-2 stop              stop the AI now and free its memory

The AI starts when you ask for it. On a small machine (Tiny and Light tiers)
it stops by itself after a while without use, so it is not eating memory in
the background; on the Standard tier and above it stays loaded until
ai-2 stop. The browser page says
"Not Secure" because it is served by this computer at 127.0.0.1. Nothing
leaves the machine, so there is nothing to secure.


IF SOMETHING IS NOT SET UP

The guided setup runs by itself at your first login. If you closed it, or
you want to run it again after adding memory or a disk, run:

  ai-2 wizard

It scans the computer, tunes it, measures the AI Score, and offers to
download the model that fits. Three questions, a few minutes.

Models:

  ai-2 model list        what is on this computer, and what else exists
  ai-2 recommend         the model that fits this machine
  ai-2 model pull        download it
  ai-2 model rm <id>     delete one to free disk space

Models are big files. They live in /var/lib/ai2/models when AI-2 was set up
by an administrator, otherwise in ~/.local/share/ai2/models.

WiFi on a Broadcom chip (many 2008-2012 laptops): most work with the
driver built into the kernel. If yours does not, connect by cable once
and run:

  ai-2 install broadcom-wifi


ADD SOFTWARE

AI-2 ships only what it needs, so the system stays small and fast on an old
machine. Everything else is one step away, from the same signed
repositories, at no cost.

With a window:

  Applications > System > Add/Remove Software

Search for what you want, tick it, click Apply. It asks for your password
because installing software changes the whole system.

In a terminal:

  ai-2 install            list the common things AI-2 leaves out
  ai-2 install office     LibreOffice
  ai-2 install printing   printing, and it enables the print service for you
  ai-2 install htop       any package name also works

The short names cover office, pdf, media, photos, image-editor, browser,
archives, printing, scanner and usb-disks. Anything else you name is passed
straight to the system package manager, which is pacman, so
`sudo pacman -S <name>` does the same job if you already know it.

Two notes for small machines. LibreOffice and GIMP are large, both to
download and to run; check you have the disk space first with `df -h /`.
And software you install this way is not made by AI-2, it comes from Artix
and Arch Linux, so its own help pages are the ones to read.


UPDATE THE SYSTEM

AI-2 is a rolling release. There are no versions to upgrade between and no
reinstall, ever. You update, and the computer is current. The AI-2 tool, the
AI engine, the model list, the desktop and the kernel all update together in
one step.

When updates are waiting you get a notification, and a one-line reminder the
next time you open a terminal. Nothing is ever installed behind your back.

With a window:

  Applications > AI-2 > Software Updates

In a terminal:

  ai-2 update

That is `sudo pacman -Syu` with a friendlier face, and it prints the exact
command before running it, so you can also type that yourself.

Advice worth following:

- Update when you have time and a stable connection. It is one operation,
  and interrupting it halfway is the one way to make a mess.
- Update the whole thing. Updating single packages on a rolling release is
  how systems break. `ai-2 update` never does that.
- On a laptop, plug it in first.
- If it complains about keys or signatures, run
  `sudo pacman -Sy artix-keyring ai2-keyring` and update again.
- Read what it prints at the end. It is rare, but sometimes a package needs
  a manual step and that is where it says so.


WHEN SOMETHING IS WRONG

  ai-2 doctor    checks the engine, the model, the tuning and the services
  ai-2 report    writes ~/ai2-report.txt to attach to a bug report

The report contains hardware details, checks and log tails. It does not
contain anything you typed to the AI.

If the AI will not start, the usual causes are a model that was never
downloaded (run `ai-2 wizard`) and a disk that is full (`df -h /`).


ACCESSIBILITY

  ai-2 accessibility         is a screen reader running, and what is set up
  ai-2 accessibility setup   install Orca, speech-dispatcher and espeak-ng,
                             turn on the screen reader and its Super+Alt+S
                             shortcut

With a screen reader running, `ai-2 chat` opens the terminal chat instead of
the browser page, because that page is the AI engine's own and not ours to
fix. For answers read out loud:

  ai-2 chat --terminal --speak


A BIGGER AI SOMEWHERE ELSE

The AI Score is honest: on a slow computer the local models are small and
so are their answers. There are two ways to talk to a bigger one from this
computer.

Another computer in the house. On the stronger one, run:

  ai-2 serve --host 0.0.0.0 --api-key CHOOSE-A-KEY

then on this one:

  ai-2 remote set http://THAT-COMPUTER:8080 --api-key CHOOSE-A-KEY
  ai-2 chat --remote

An API provider you have a key for (any OpenAI-compatible service):

  ai-2 remote set https://PROVIDER/v1 --api-key YOUR-KEY --model MODEL-NAME
  ai-2 chat --remote

Nothing leaves this computer unless you ask. The chat uses the remote only
with --remote, or always after  ai-2 remote default on  (then --local goes
back to this computer's own AI). Every remote chat starts by saying where
the messages go. The key is kept in a file only you can read.
ai-2 remote show, test and clear do what they say.


REMOTE ACCESS

An installed AI-2 keeps remote access off. If someone you trust needs to
work on this computer from theirs, on your own network, turn it on with:

  sudo ln -s /etc/runit/sv/sshd /run/runit/service/

It stays on until the next reboot. Leave it off the rest of the time.


HELP

  ai-2 --help            every command, and every command has its own --help
  https://github.com/ProWoos-Devs/ai-2/wiki      AI-2 documentation
  https://github.com/ProWoos-Devs/ai-2/issues    bugs and ideas
  https://wiki.artixlinux.org                    the system underneath

AI-2 is free software, MIT license. Artix Linux components keep their own
licenses, the AI engine (llama.cpp) is MIT, and models keep the license of
their authors.
