> AI-2 █
START HERE
==========

Give your computer an AI brain.


WHAT AI-2 IS

AI-2 is a Linux system for ordinary and older computers that gives them a
local AI assistant: a language model that runs on the machine itself, on
the CPU, with no account, no subscription and no data leaving the computer.

AI-2 does not turn a computer away for being old or slow. Above a small
floor (64-bit CPU, 2 GB of RAM, about 6 GB of disk) it looks at the
hardware, assigns it a capability tier, tunes the system for that tier,
measures what the machine can really do, and recommends models that
genuinely fit. Local where possible, remote (an online model) only if you
explicitly choose it.

AI-2 is based on Artix Linux (itself based on Arch Linux), with the runit
init system and the XFCE desktop. Being Artix means a rolling release: you
update, you never reinstall for a new version.


REQUIREMENTS

- A 64-bit (x86_64) PC. Very old CPUs are fine: AI-2 ships three builds of
  the AI engine (llama.cpp) and picks the one your CPU can run, including
  CPUs without AVX or SSE4.1. The oldest machine AI-2 was validated on is a
  2011 laptop with an AMD A4-3305M and 4 GB of RAM.
- RAM: 2 GB minimum (Tiny tier, the smallest models only), 4 GB is the
  Light tier, 8 GB and up unlock larger models.
- Disk: about 6 GB for the system, plus room for models (the smallest is
  about 0.4 GB, the largest in the catalog about 5 GB).
- Boot from this USB stick or DVD, on a BIOS or UEFI computer. If the
  computer refuses to boot the stick and mentions Secure Boot, turn Secure
  Boot off in the firmware setup (the key shown at power-on, often F2, Del,
  F10 or Esc). AI-2 is 64-bit only; the boot menu says so if the machine
  is not.
- Internet is not needed to install. It is needed later to download models
  and updates.


THIS LIVE SESSION

You are running AI-2 from the stick. Nothing on your disks has been changed.
Try it, look around, then install it if you like it. The live user is
"ai-2" (password "ai-2"), and it can use sudo.

If the desktop never appeared or the screen stayed black, reboot, and in
the boot menu select the blank line, type   nomodeset   and press Enter,
then start AI-2 again.


INSTALLING AI-2 ON THIS COMPUTER

1. Back up anything you care about first. Installing can erase a disk.
2. Double-click "Install AI-2" on the desktop. The installer starts
   directly, no questions about configurations.
3. Location: pick your region and city (sets the clock and locale).
4. Keyboard: pick your layout and try it in the test box.
5. Partitions: choose how to use the disk.
     "Erase disk"   uses the whole disk for AI-2 (everything on it is lost).
     "Install alongside" keeps an existing system (for example Windows) and
                    lets you shrink it to make room; you get a boot menu.
     "Manual"       for people who know their partitions.
   How to recognize your partitions in that page: the bar shows every
   partition of the chosen disk with a name, a size and a filesystem type.
   Windows lives on NTFS partitions ("Windows 7", "Windows 10" or just
   "sda2" when Windows gave it no name); a Linux system already installed
   shows under its own name ("Artix Linux", "AI-2"); "ext4" is a Linux
   filesystem. When in doubt, the size tells them apart. AI-2 labels its
   own partition "AI-2" when it installs.
6. Users: your name, a login name, a password (also used for admin tasks).
7. Summary: read it, this is the last moment to go back.
8. Install: takes a few minutes on a modern machine, longer on an old one.
9. Finish: tick "Restart now", remove the stick when asked.

The installed system boots to the AI-2 login screen. Log in with the user
you created.


FIRST STEPS AFTER INSTALLING

At your first login a window titled "AI-2 setup" opens by itself and walks
you through it: it scans the computer, tunes the system for it (asks for
your password once), measures what the machine can really do (the AI Score,
0 to 100), recommends a model that fits and offers to download it. A few
minutes, three questions. If you close it, run it again any time with:

  ai-2 wizard

Then talk to the AI: Applications > AI-2 Chat (or  ai-2 chat  in a
terminal). It starts the local AI and opens the chat page in the browser;
the AI stops by itself when you have not used it for a while. The address
bar says "Not Secure" because the page is served by your own computer at
127.0.0.1; nothing leaves the machine, there is nothing to secure. If the
page shows an error the first time, reload it.

The same steps by hand, in a terminal (Applications > Terminal Emulator):

  ai-2 detect          what AI-2 sees: CPU (and which engine build it
                       needs), RAM, GPU, disk, init system
  ai-2 tier            the capability tier assigned to this machine, and why
  sudo ai-2 init --apply
                       tune the system for the tier (compressed swap in RAM,
                       out-of-memory protection, no idle suspend, and the
                       engine build for this CPU)
  ai-2 benchmark       measure real inference speed and compute the AI Score
  ai-2 recommend       the local models that fit this machine's score
  ai-2 model pull      download the recommended model
  ai-2 chat            start the local AI and open the chat page
  ai-2 stop            stop the local AI and free its memory
  ai-2 doctor          check that everything is in order
  ai-2 report          write a file to attach to a bug report
  ai-2 serve           the same AI as a service for programs (OpenAI-style
                       API at http://127.0.0.1:8080/), stops when idle

Every command has --help.


INCLUDED, AND UPDATES

A small model (Gemma 3 270M) comes on the disc, so you can chat the moment
the install finishes, even with no internet. It is fast and light; it is not
the smartest model. Once you are online, AI-2 measures your machine, can fetch
a model that fits it better, and tells you if updates are waiting.

AI-2, the AI engine and the list of available models all update the normal
way:

  sudo pacman -Syu

The first-login setup explains all of this and does it for you. Run it again
any time with  ai-2 wizard .


LEAN BY DESIGN

AI-2 ships only what it needs: the desktop, a browser, a text editor and
the AI engine. No office suite, no media players, no printing stack, no
kernel headers. That keeps the download small and the system light on
old machines. Anything you miss is one command away, for example:

  sudo pacman -S atril          PDF viewer
  sudo pacman -S cups           printing
  sudo pacman -S vlc            media player
  sudo pacman -S libreoffice-still


UPDATING

AI-2 packages come from a signed repository that is already configured.
Update the whole system with:

  sudo pacman -Syu


MORE HELP

- Artix documentation: https://wiki.artixlinux.org
- Boot menu: press h for the boot help.
- Live session log: /var/log/artix-live.log


LICENSE

AI-2 is free software, MIT license. Artix Linux components keep their own
licenses. The AI engine (llama.cpp) is MIT. Models keep the license of
their authors.
